I was
born in Medina County in December the 8th, 1892. I
was born right on in a ranch house.
It's 25 miles from town.
What town? Hondo.
Those days, well, I'd say every member of our
family was born in that ranch house. We was a family
of 12 children. Large family. Very large family.
Could you tell us your dad's name? Henry, Henry
Rothery. And your mother? And her name was Anna
Reinhardt.
She was coming from another old family of ours. of
German immigrant family and ranch people. She
comes from a large family. She was very, she was
very well adapted to ranch life. Knew what it, and
it was a hard,
it was a hard life, you might say. You know, when
you, when the mother takes care of a family of that
size and together with oh I'd say we had we
maintained probably a half a dozen ranch hands
beside that and to cook and feed them do all that
laundry.
That was a hard a hard life for a woman too. It was but
she was I say she was well enough. She was a very,
very big woman. Big frame, I mean, all muscle.
To maintain that, I mean, the schedule that she had
to get up, oh,
probably got up between four and five o'clock in
the morning to start the day's program. and
breakfast food ready for the men that started out
to work. And they usually left the ranch house all
daybreak.
And
she lived to be, she died of a ruptured appendix
when she was 78 years old. She didn't know she was
even bothered with it. She'd been out. She'd been
out fishing with a sister of hers, and they had
walked ten miles up and down the stream out there on
the frill with a fish pole. At 78. That's
marvelous.
She had a very strong constitution. I think that's
one of the things that's more so than my father. My
father was not... He was a more of a, he was a pretty
good horse trader. And he proved it in his
operations. He was, he uh, I guess at one time had at
least 50,000 acres in one tract of land in Medina
County and 20,000 acres more out there. Oh, in
Brackettville, I believe. That's...
I think it's Emmett County, I'm not sure, but it's
around out there, and it was in that county of
Brackettville. And he left all his children
pretty well set up. He left his old $50,000 piece.
That's the closest I'd hold that on. Well, it's
been a long time. Can you tell us a little bit about
your boyhood, your experiences? Yes. He moved us,
of course, he moved the family to San Antonio. Like
I say, he was strongly interested in education.
And so we could go to school. And he moved, that was
the first time that I ever saw a train was about in
1895 when We drove down from that ranch to get on
that train to go to San Antonio. Must have been
quite an experience. It was, I'll tell you. I know
we got to San Antonio. We lived there in San Antonio
then until about 19, until 1905 or 6 or 7, along in
there. At that time, Hondo had, it had developed
the way that they voted out. a school district and
build a pretty good schoolhouse, and he thought it
would be more convenient to move the family back to
Hondo, closer to his place, to where he was in
business. He was, of
course, spending quite a bit of his time then in
Hondo itself. He was president of the bank there.
He had tried operating a big mercantile business,
which didn't turn out too successfully as he was
too trustful. He didn't even watch his business
and they turned it over to a friend and they left him
about $120,000 in the red when his creditors came
in and wanted to know what he was going to do about
his business.
in hondo well i finished the public schools and
then attended
a preparatory school in san antonio for a year
before i went to a m and had an a m in 19 in the fall of
1911. why did you go to a m why did you pick that
school well i imagine i'd had um three other
brothers there before me and i think my father of
course as he is associated, I might say his life
work was associated with his cattle and
agriculture, that he was interested more in his
children going to the school of an agricultural
school than Texas University. He had no use. I
remember some of the boys said they probably want
to go to Austin to study law, Texas University. He
says you go to A&M or study some form of
engineering. I had a brother then that he went to
Michigan School of Mines and another brother went
to Ohio State and studied veterinary science.
Now, when did you enter Anaheim? In the fall of
when? 1911. 1911. My first year down there was the
year they started. They had the idea of, I don't
know, they burned down all the old buildings.
Something happened, yes. You heard that story, I
guess. Well, I knew they burned, but I don't know
about the story of it. Well, I don't know it either,
but then the fact that so many of them burned up,
it's... Unusual. It almost got the idea that
somebody was mixed up with it. They burned up the
old mess hall, the one they called the old original
Speeder mess hall.
Then they burned up the main building, which
brought the school, I'd say, to a stop, because
most of the classrooms were in the main building.
And they
disrupted, of course, burning up the missile.
They suspended school for 30 days and in the
meantime put up a temporary missile, built it out
there out of sheet iron. Oh, I don't believe they
had a concrete floor. I believe they just put in a
plain old floor in there and a sheet iron side and
roof on it. Wooden floor. Yeah, wooden floor. And
they used that building then until they built the,
I guess, the old, the present mess hall is still in
use, isn't it? Visa Hall is still in use, yes. Where
did you live that first year? I, my first year in
school, I was in Foster Hall. at one of the old
dormitories. My last GI, they gave me a company
captainship and put me over there in Milner.
Uh-huh, and still there. Still there. Milner's
still there. Foster Hall's gone. And I think
George Crawford was in my company. Yes, I believe
he was. What other recollections do you have of
that first year on the campus there? How did the
school impress you? What was it like? Oh, well, of
course it was so different from anything I had ever
come in contact with. The first thing that was a, we
were entering the
the football
season. And there was one form of hazing that they
had there. They'd bring out all the fish. They'd
assemble all the fish and put them in nightshade.
And that was the days before pajamas.
put on their nightshades and frayed them around
all over the campus.
We'd go all up and down where the professors would
live in what they called Quality Row. Does it still
go by that name? Oh, it's gone, but I've got
pictures of it. No, it's been torn down. Yeah, we
had those pep rallies. Went on for quite
frequently. I'd say that we had a pep rally at, oh,
two or three every week. They call them yell
practices now. Do they call them yell practices?
Yell practice, yes. Yes. And yell leaders. Right,
we still have them. No girls. No girls in the yell
leaders. And
you went there in 1911. And that was one of the
things that impressed me about our year leader. He
was an old boy from Millinder. And he come out of way
out of the Morpha. Morpha or West of Morpha. And he
was a almost every week for non-regulation
uniform because he wouldn't wear anything but
boots with his trousers stuck to the top of his
boots. Do you remember his name? Yeah, Milliner.
Milliner? Yeah. Lindy. Lindy Milliner.
Milliner.
Okay. I met him through World War I. I ran across him
over there in France. He was a captain. I was his
chaplain.
And you said you went there in 1911? Mm-hmm. When
did you graduate? The 17th. So you must have had
some time off. Yes, they gave me time off. Because,
you know, the old hazing, it was pretty much, it was
practiced pretty heavily in those days. And you
had, those were the days when
they had no heat except stoves. And there was no...
the water, you got your water from a hydrant
outside. And all them sophomores and
upperclassmen, the fish had to always go out and
keep their wood box filled up and keep their water
bucket full. And if you didn't, if you was a
sophomore's fish and he come up there and there was
no wood there, boy, you was in a in trouble. I was,
from my early training, I was,
I guess in the habit of keeping myself pretty neat.
You had to take care of your own uniform. You got
yourself You only had the old cadet grays at that
time. There was no khakis. And you had to keep them
trousers pressed pretty good if you wanted to look
good.
We did guard duty. I don't think they do that
anymore. No, not much. But all the guard duty was,
the cadets had had to do three, what they call,
three tours of guard duty at night. It went on from 7
to 10 o'clock, and that was the study period. And
during that study period, there was supposed to be
a sentry in that dormitory, in that hall, just
walking round and round. And I remember my first
night, I came on sentry duty. I was in the legate,
and there was a bunch of football players in there.
And somebody stuck his head out and said, uh-oh,
got a fish on sentry tonight. And they almost tore
that dormitory to pieces. They run all over me
because I was a fish, you know. And then up comes up.
And the cadet major, I'll never forget that bird,
he almost got me canned. Oh, I tell you, man, he'd
come up there and yank me up. You want to know what I
meant by letting all this disturbance going on on
my post? Why, I didn't stop him. I said, I can't do
nothing with them big football players. He says,
you're on charge. You got your gun, your bayonet.
He said, just take after them. Get them out of
there. And then he made me go through all my general
orders and my special orders. I knew all that
stuff. And then his final instruction when he left
me says I want you to report yourself to the
guardhouse when you're going on for for allowing
this disturbance
so when I got off I went into the to the sergeant of
the guard and made my report he says yay sergeant of
guard says The majors already beat you to it.
And that was an unusual coincidence that got me off
of the hook on that deal. The brother that went to
Ohio State was coming home one summer and in the
Pullman with him, was a young lieutenant out of
West Point who was reporting to A&M as a commander.
And my brother was telling him that he had a younger
brother who was going to A&M that fall.
And so when I,
we call that the RAM list for any misdemeanor. I
don't know whether they still have a misdemeanor
list or not. But every night, Every night at
supper, the adjutant would read out the RAM list.
And then it would be a list of 150 names at least.
Every night. And there was my name on there that
night for...
And I got the maximum amount of demerits. How many
was that? I think it was five on one offense. Five
demerits. And I... and with instructions to
report to the, to the commandant.
Well, I walk into the commandant's office, told
him my name, and he says, yes, he says, I know you. He
says, you know, I had a nice visit with your
brother. He says, we came, I came down here riding
on the Pullman with him, and he, he told me about his
early experiences at A&M and that that he had a
younger brother, and you were him, the younger
brother of the man I met, and I said, yes. And we
talked on a little bit, and he was telling me how
much he enjoyed. He said, I'll tell you what you do,
he says, Just write an explanation to me about that
and I'll take care of it. And boy, I wrote my
explanation and
he scratched off the demerits of me. Because if
there's one thing, I'll say, that my father wasn't
put up with, and that was disobedience. And I knew
how that was going to stand in my quarter You see, we
had two terms at that time. We had two terms, and my
report home with those demerits on it, and I was
working my head off to get those demerits off me, so
when my report goes home, no demerit. And that's
what I meant about that I had acquired the habit of
keeping myself in sort of a spit and polish
condition. When I turned out to guard my office,
When you went up to Gordon in those days, the
adjutant would inspect you, and after he looked
through, you know, inspect your rifle, your
general appearance and everything, and he'd pick
out the cadet that had the neatest appearance, and
for that he got five demerit credits, and excused
from walking a post. And that's one of the things
that got me into trouble in a way. Because I used to
have to, for the sophomores, that when they got on
guard duty, they'd come down and say, say, Fish,
I'm on guard mount this morning. He said, get
yourself all fixed up and go on out there to guard
mount and come back with them five points of credit
for me. And I'd go out to the guard mount and then get
around. If I got the credit to ask me what my name,
I'd give the name of their sophomore.
That agent says, how many names you got? That's
good. That's really good.
Now, you left A&M for a while. Oh, yeah. Next year, I
come back. Of course, I was a bigot. And
I got deported on a fish. And we made the mistake,
one of the fish in the company that was in the old Ann
Foster Hall was the son of a state senator. And when
he went home at Christmas, he complained to his
father about the terrible treatment that he was
subjected to down in that hazing. And the senator,
came back to Austin and reported it to the
governor. And the governor wrote the president a
letter of the conditions that was going down there
and ordered an explanation and for him to check
into it and make a report. And one day, in about the
first, it was either the first or the second week
after January when it got back, why
the company, our company commander, I think, as I
remember, his name was Oliver. He says, no, it
wasn't him. It was the old bull himself. They
called the... the commandant, the bull in those
days. Still called military, regular military
bulls. Well, the old commandant, he'd come out
there and he said, and he read off these names and he
said, I read these names, you will step one pace
forward. Well, as was a custom in those days, the
fish all had the rear rank, and the upperclassmen
had the front rank. And when he got through calling
the names, the front rank had stepped one piece
forward. And he said, you men whose names I've
called will be excused from drill, but you will put
your guns and bayonets away and report to the
disciplining committee in one hour.
And he was, he was, he had a wonderful memory for
names. I only appeared before him when I reported
back in, I mean, at the first school. And there was a
new commandant there, the one I was talking about
the first. He had been assigned to another, tour of
duty somewhere else. And this fellow's name was
Levi G. Brown. I always remember that name because
when they read the land list, the ram list, it says,
by order of Levi G. Brown, Commandant.
And Levi...
When I walked up before the district committee, he
just called my name out. Brother H.H. He didn't ask
me what my name was. He called me. And he said,
you've been accused by cadet so-and-so, and he
named the son of the senator, for taking part in a
hazing incident just before Christmas.
And he says, are you guilty or not guilty? I said,
I'm guilty. That's all. And we were all expelled.
My goodness. And that's when the cadet corps went
on a strike. All 27, there was 27 of us, got canned
out of there. Well, they didn't say how long a time
we just came. We were reinstated. the following,
during the summer sometime, and I went back in the
summer. So I came back, I started taking
architecture. That was my architectural
engineering.
And
I came back, and when I walked into that
commandant's office, I just stuck my head in the
door, and there was old Brown sitting over there,
and he looked up and he says, Rory, I'm glad to see
you back. He didn't hesitate a moment.
That's why I say he had a marvelous memory for
names. You said there was a strike. Do you know
anything about that strike, what went on then?
Well, it was dissolved. in just what way, and all
the cadets that would come back, there were no
charges filed against them. But you left, you
weren't there during the strike. Oh no, I had to
leave. I mean, we were told to leave and get off that
campus before 12 o'clock that night. Right,
goodness. And we left there, and we caught, there
was a night train left there just about 11 o'clock,
and we caught that How many got expelled along with
you? How many was there? Twenty-seven. Are they
all sophomores? Sophomores and juniors. What
incident provoked this? That hazing. What did
y'all do that was so bad and got you kicked out?
Well, just give them a good strapping. Before you
went home Christmas, that was our Christmas
present. We lined up all the fish. It was a general
practice. Just before you go home Christmas, All
the upperclassmen would line you up and they'd all
take a whack at your rear end with a belt.
And so this boy thought he had a little too much.
Well, yeah, and he was a son of a senator. Oh, I see.
Well, that shouldn't have made him too popular.
No, he'd never come back.
Oh, my goodness. So you had to lay out then for that
second semester in the summer then. And then I sort
of lost my contact. Well, I didn't lose it too bad,
but I was a pretty fair student. But I was taking
part and I was a pretty fair track man. I'll just put
it that way. I had one time I held a record in the
broad jump in the pole vault for the state. I didn't
know that. What year did you hold that record?
Well, I set it in 15, and it was broken by an A&M man in
1919. That must have been quite an honor to hold
that. Well, I thought it was.
But I just had another incident about this fellow
Bull Brown. I was, I came down here, down here to the
valley and the American Legion post had an idea,
you know, they come, we'll make us a war picture and
make us some money. And we didn't have no
equipment. And Ringgold, that's an army post
right up here in Rio Grande City. It's up about,
it's about 25, 30 miles up there, right up the river
road. And another fellow was put on, we'd had some
contact with Ringgold up there. Well, we put on a
committee to go up there and see him, but if we could
borrow some uniforms, and some army equipment,
rifles and something, to make this picture with.
And we didn't think his name. And we walked into the
Adjutant's office. We both knew him. There was a
fellow with me. He was a veterinarian and a doctor
here by the name of Ootsman. And we walked in there
and we was talking to this Adjutant. And the
Adjutant says, We told him what our mission was,
that we wanted to borrow some uniform and maybe
some ordnance, rifles and stuff like that. We had a
plan of making a picture down there, a movie
picture. One of these promoters come along, you
know how they do, come into a small town and try to
promote something to make some money on. And he
sold us on this idea of making this movie. Well, He
says, the agent says to us, he says, you know, this
place has just turned, had a turnover of
commanding officers. And the new commanding
officer, he just got here yesterday. And he said,
there's his office. He said, I can't say I don't
know him too well. He said, I've been here a day. He
said, I'm sure he'd be cooperative just going in,
just tell him what your deal is. I think he'd help
out now. I looked around like that, we both looked
around, and there was Bo Brown. He said, Rory, come
on in here. I want to talk to you. When was this? When
did you do it? When was this? What date? Do you
remember what year? It was about 25. 1945. And
the last time I saw him was probably about 1914,
before that. And in 1925, I went in there and we had a
nice boat session with the old colonel. He was a
colonel by that time. And he was the highest
ranking American officer captured in World War I.
I'll be darned. And I run into, I said I operated the
Bibian, the tavern dealer there for a while. And I
met an old boy, World War I boy, and he had quite an
experience. He was with the...
I thought I'd remember his division. And he and his
colonel got along very well. He said, you know, he
was telling me about his colonel, how well... how
well his colonel thought of him, that he could get
anything he wanted out of his colonel, because the
colonel said I was the best army sergeant he'd ever
had. And he said, I can't think of his name, but you
know he was the highest American army officer,
kept you doing well going? And I said, you don't
know his name? I said, I know him very well. He said,
what do you know about him? He said, you wasn't in
our outfit. I said, no, but I know the guy you're
talking about. And I said, not much, his name was
Levi G. Brown. He said, that's what it was.
Now, you were involved in a very interesting
incident involving the branding of the Texas
Longhorn. Could you tell us how that took place
leading up to that? Who was involved and how y'all
went about it? Well, I'll tell you, one of the
things that promoted it, did you ever, you heard of
the incident at the time when they got Rice's Owl,
did you? No, I don't have it. Well, that happened
just before that. The basketball team went down to
play Rice, and they played that. In those days, you
know, you had very limited facilities. And Rice
did not have a gym. And we just had a makeshift gym.
And they played in the YMCA gym downtown.
And Rice comes down. Do they still have that old
stuffed owl? I believe so. They used to have a
stuffed owl. It was about a six-foot deal. Painted
up, you know, like an owl. And that was their
mascot. And they'd bring it out to all their
athletic contests and set it on the sideline. And
they brought it down there for that basketball
game. And when the game was over, where they
carelessly left that owl sat in there somewhere.
And that A&M basketball team, when they got
through dressing and cleaning up, and they come
out and they saw that owl sat in there, they
thought, well, I think we'll just take him back to
college with us. They just picked it up, brought it
down there, and put it in the express car.
brought it on up to College Station. Well, they had
a lot of fun with it around a couple of days. They
paraded that aisle around there. Brazell was
president at that time, and they brought it over
there to Brazell's residence. He'd come out and
had his picture made with it. They published it in
the Houston papers, and it got them Ross aisle boys
kind of stirred up, and they made a deal with a
private eye to come up and And so I surveyed the deal
and find out where we kept the owl and what was done
with it. And he come up there and posed as
a sports writer for one of the newspapers. And
the boys, the basketball players or whoever it
was, took him up. We kept him up in the arm. He was up
on the fourth floor. main building of the old or it
was of course a new main building at that time. So
they took him up there and showed him why the aisle
and and brought him out and he made some pictures of
it and that night he after he got through he said I'm
going to write you all boys up a good story on this
deal. He wired down to those rice cadets that had it
all spotted up for them to come up that night. They
came up in a car. And they came up there right around
midnight. And they went up there and broke into the
armory. And the night watchman discovered the
deal and fired off a volley of shots or something.
And it was right around 12 o'clock at night. And
boy, everybody tumbled out of bed in just no time at
all. The word got around that a bunch of rice cadets
came up and got that owl out of the army. And just
about that time, one of them
passenger trains was going south, and everybody
tore off for the depot. I went down and just
commandeered that train and about two or three
hundred cadets, at least two or three hundred
cadets swarmed on top of that thing and told them to
take off and went on down the road toward Dunn.
What's the name of that town just south of College?
Hempstead? No, no, a little closer. Just south of
College Station there. About 20. Welborn? About
20 miles south of it. Pretty concise town at that
time. Well, anyhow, they didn't get very far. I
wasn't on the deal. But they didn't get very far.
And right in those days, just what they called a
highway was just a little old dirt road running
along the railroad track. There they saw them. Saw
those rice hounds with that with that owl in the
cart. And they run on about a half a mile and pull
that string and stop the train. Everybody went
out, towed a barricade across
the road. And towed, and run those cadets all over
that Bradford's Bottom down there. They finally
picked them all up. turned their car around just
before they picked him up while the Rice Isles,
those Rice Isles set fire to their mascot and
burned him up.
They brought him back up to College Station and
walked him around there for about two days until,
and then the president of Rice called Dr. Bezell
and said, There's enough of that horseplay going
around to have those harassed students turned
loose and let them come back and go to school. Well,
old Doc Giselle complied with the request. He
turned them loose. But that sports writer, he was
in a bad way. They finally found out who he was, that
he was a private eye, and they brought him back. And
they turned him over to the fish, and them fish
really mistreated him, something terrible. They
walked him around, just walked him around, and
just kept threatening him all the time. And he was
just pleading all the time for his life. He thought
he was going to get killed. And they finally told
him, said, we're going to turn you loose. Some of
the upperclassmen told them to turn him loose. And
they took him out on the parade ground, and it was a
cold night. It was freezing or better. Took him out
there on the parade ground at midnight, undressed
him, took all his clothes off, gave him his shoes,
and said, all right, go on to Houston
if you
want to. And that's what And that's what led us up to
the, we kind of got it into our system, you know,
about playing pranks. And
Texas University was getting a lot of publicity
about their
mascot. They didn't have any name for him. They
didn't have any name. No, up to that time they had no
name, but he was a marvelous specimen of a
lawnmower. of a big, raw, just a big-boned, mean
outlaw. I've had the experience with them. I spent
all my boyhood on a ranch, and I know what they are.
When they brought them out for a football game,
they had four men on horseback with ropes on them in
every direction. one on each side, and they'd lead
him up and down the football field because, I mean,
one rope, he'd take after him. You had to have him
tied from every direction to take care of him. And
they was putting on all this big deal about, they
have a sort of a homecoming or the letterman, on
Texas Independence Day. And they had
won that game that year by a score of, I think it was
20 to three or some such score as that.
Just the year before that, we beat Texas 13 to
nothing. And you know Texas and A&M quit playing
football there for a period of time. You've heard
the name Charlie Moran. Well Charlie Moran was a
guy that brought, he brought in the recruiting
idea really into Texas schools. Charlie was an old
pro. He was a pro football player and a pro baseball
player, and of course he had played college
football as a youngster. But when he came to A&M, it
was just at the time when,
right shortly after the Congress had suspended
athletics all athletics at Carlisle University
in Pennsylvania, that old Indian school, the one
that Jim Thorpe went to. Well, there were a bunch of
pretty good football players on the loose around
that, and Charlie got hold of about three of them,
of the old Carlisle football players.
And he brought in several others. He had quite a
football player brought in from Alabama, and he
got one out of Colorado, Lyman. 200-pound men in
those days was unusual, and these were around 225,
230-pound
boys. Could we stop just a minute and let me turn my
tape over? I'm running out on this side. Okay.
Thank you.